README.md, before:

# Improv

[![NPM version][npm-image]][npm-url] [![Build Status][travis-image]][travis-url] [![Dependency Status](https://david-dm.org/sequitur/improv.svg)](https://david-dm.org/sequitur/improv)

A model-backed generative text grammar tool for javascript. Improv is similar to Tracery in that it can generate random, procedurally generated text recursively. Also like Tracery, Improv includes some basic templating functionality.

Unlike Tracery, however, Improv generators refer to *models* to build text. This allows for more sophisticated text generation by referencing an underlying world model.

## Installation

Improv is an npm module, but it should work fine in a browser environment through Webpack or Browserify.

```sh
$ npm install --save improv
```

## Snippets

The default export from this module is a constructor that creates text generators from two arguments: A snippets object, and an (optional) options object.

A snippets object is just a plain JavaScript object. Each property of that object is a "snippet", a structured collection of phrases. The structure for a snippets object is:

```js
{
  "animal-gesture": {
    "groups": [
      {
        "tags": [
          ["pet", "dog", "puppy"],
          ["status", "happy"]
        ],
        "phrases": [
          "The puppy wags his tail excitedly."
          "The puppy yips happily."
        ]
      },
      {
        "tags": [
          ["pet", "cat"],
          ["status", "tired"]
        ],
        "phrases": [
          "The cat groans exhaustedly."
        ]
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

Because snippets are plain data objects, they can be conveniently loaded or assembled from JSON, CSON, or YAML files.

## Instantiating a Generator

An Improv generator is a collection of snippets attached to a configuration, which defines its behavioural specifics.

The main option, currently, is `filters`, a list of filters that the generator should apply when choosing which phrases are valid.

```js
/* Improv itself is written in ES6 through Babel */
import Improv from "improv";

const myGenerator = new Improv(snippetObject, {
  filters: [Improv.filters.mismatchFilter()]
});

let text = myGenerator.gen('snippet-name', modelObject);
```

Model objects can be anything, but Improv's default filters expect an object with a `tags` property similar to a group in a snippet set.

## Filters

Improv comes witht a number of filters previously defined as properties of `Improv.filters`. However, those are just regular functions; you can use your own. A filter is a function that takes a single group (from a snippet) and a model object, and returns either a number, or `null`.

`null` indicates that the group in question is inappropriate and should be excluded from selection entirely. A number, normally a small positive or negative integer, is treated as a scoring offset. The numeric results from each filter are added up to form a salience score. Improv, when generating text, will use only text from the highest-scoring groups.

### Tags

While models and groups can have any properties you want and you can write custom filters that take them into account, Improv by default relies on a tagging system.

A tag is an array of strings (words) that is treated as a series of increasingly specific categories. Two tags that have the same first element (`a[0] === b[0]`) are considered a *matched pair*; all of the default filters look only at matched pairs when making decisions. That is, if a model and a group have no tags with identical first elements, they have no defined relationship to one another, and the salience score for that group will be 0 (the baseline score).

Matched pairs are compared side-by-side; if one of the tags has an element that is different from the element in the same position in its counterpart, they are *mismatched*. For instance, `['pet', 'dog', 'spaniel']` and `['pet', 'cat']` are mismatched.

If both halves of the matched pair are identical (all elements are the same), this is a *total match*. If all elements in one half of the pair match their counterparts, but the other half is longer, this is a *partial match*. For instance, `['pet', 'dog']` and `['pet', 'dog', 'spaniel']` are partially matched.

Note that order matters; `['pet', 'dog', 'spaniel']` and `['pet', 'spaniel']` are mismatched, not a partial match. `['pet', 'dog']`and `['dog', 'pet']` are not a matched pair at all.

### Included filters

Improv.filter contains *factories* that return functions; most of these can be customised. The ones that can't use the factory pattern for consistency's sake.

#### mismatchFilter ()

Returns null if the group and model have a mismatched tag pair, 0 otherwise. This filter is useful for completely removing inappropriate phrases from the pool.

#### partialBonus (bonus = 1, cumulative = true)

The `partialBonus` filter calculates salience score based on partial matches. If `cumulative` is false, it will return a score offset equal to `bonus`; if it is true, it will multiply that bonus by the number of partial matches. If there are no partial matches, it returns 0.

#### fullBonus (bonus = 1, cumulative = true)

Behaves identically to the `partialBonus` filter, but counts full matches instead.

## Templating

All text Improv generates (from phrases in groups in snippets) is run through an extremely minimal templating engine. This engine recognises directives delimited by brackets (`[like so]`); directives are simply replaced in place by some other value. The templating engine recurs until it can't find directives in the text any more. Currently, brackets are the only supported delimiters, and they can't be escaped, but this should change eventually.

### Generator directives

Directives starting in `:` are passed back to the generator; this allows nesting snippets, like Tracery. For instance, the phrase `[:animal]` will resolve to the snippet named "animal" in the same generator's collection of snippets.

### Random number directives

Directives starting in `#` are replaced with a random number. `[#1-20]` will produce a random number between 1 and 20, inclusive. A hyphen is the delimiter between the two numbers.

### Plain directives

Directives that don't start with a special character are treated as properties of the model object to be retrieved. `[prop]` will look at the `prop` property of the model that was passed to `Improv#gen()`. This can be used to retrieve nested properties, eg `[nested.prop]`.

### Worked templating example

```js
const spec = {
  root: {
    groups: [
      {
        phrases: ['Hi, my name is [name], and I own [#1-20] [:pet]s.']
      }
    ]
  },
  pet: {
    groups: [
      {
        phrases: ['cat', 'dog', 'parakeet']
      }
    ]
  }
}

const greet = new Improv(spec);

// Should produce something like:
// "Hi, my name is Bob and I own 17 cats."
greet.gen(spec, { name: 'Bob' });
```

## Reincorporation

If you create a generator with `{ reincorporate: true }` in its options, that generator will update the model it's working with whenever it runs. What this means is that the tags associated with any phrase that it uses will be merged into the tags of the model.

For instance, suppose you are generating procedural descriptions of clothing; you could have phrases tagged as `['fabric', 'satin']` and so on. You don't have to specify a fabric tag beforehand; once the generator uses one, it will be incorporated to the model. Given the right use of filtering rules, this means Improv can be used to build free-form paragraphs of text that doesn't contradict itself; once it says the dress is satin, it will never use a phrase that says it's cotton.

## Caveats and Known Issues

Improv does absolutely no validation or security checking of anything, so for the love of God don't pass user-submitted data into it.

The API can and probably will change in the future as the library evolves.

## License

MIT © [Bruno Dias](http://segue.pw/)


[npm-image]: https://badge.fury.io/js/improv.svg
[npm-url]: https://npmjs.org/package/improv
[travis-image]: https://travis-ci.org/sequitur/improv.svg?branch=master
[travis-url]: https://travis-ci.org/sequitur/improv
[daviddm-image]: https://david-dm.org/sequitur/improv.svg?theme=shields.io
[daviddm-url]: https://david-dm.org/sequitur/improv

Commit message:

Add reincorporation and dryness features

README.md, after:

# Improv

[![NPM version][npm-image]][npm-url] [![Build Status][travis-image]][travis-url] [![Dependency Status](https://david-dm.org/sequitur/improv.svg)](https://david-dm.org/sequitur/improv)

A model-backed generative text grammar tool for javascript. Improv is similar to Tracery in that it can generate random, procedurally generated text recursively. Also like Tracery, Improv includes some basic templating functionality.

Unlike Tracery, however, Improv generators refer to *models* to build text. This allows for more sophisticated text generation by referencing an underlying world model.

## Installation

Improv is an npm module, but it should work fine in a browser environment through Webpack or Browserify.

```sh
$ npm install --save improv
```

## Snippets

The default export from this module is a constructor that creates text generators from two arguments: A snippets object, and an (optional) options object.

A snippets object is just a plain JavaScript object. Each property of that object is a "snippet", a structured collection of phrases. The structure for a snippets object is:

```js
{
  "animal-gesture": {
    "groups": [
      {
        "tags": [
          ["pet", "dog", "puppy"],
          ["status", "happy"]
        ],
        "phrases": [
          "The puppy wags his tail excitedly."
          "The puppy yips happily."
        ]
      },
      {
        "tags": [
          ["pet", "cat"],
          ["status", "tired"]
        ],
        "phrases": [
          "The cat groans exhaustedly."
        ]
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

Because snippets are plain data objects, they can be conveniently loaded or assembled from JSON, CSON, or YAML files.

## Instantiating a Generator

An Improv generator is a collection of snippets attached to a configuration, which defines its behavioural specifics.

The main option, currently, is `filters`, a list of filters that the generator should apply when choosing which phrases are valid.

```js
/* Improv itself is written in ES6 through Babel */
import Improv from "improv";

const myGenerator = new Improv(snippetObject, {
  filters: [Improv.filters.mismatchFilter()]
});

let text = myGenerator.gen('snippet-name', modelObject);
```

Model objects can be anything, but Improv's default filters expect an object with a `tags` property similar to a group in a snippet set.

## Filters

Improv comes witht a number of filters previously defined as properties of `Improv.filters`. However, those are just regular functions; you can use your own. A filter is a function that takes a single group (from a snippet) and a model object, and returns either a number, `null`, or a tuple.

`null` indicates that the group in question is inappropriate and should be excluded from selection entirely. A number, normally a small positive or negative integer, is treated as a scoring offset. The numeric results from each filter are added up to form a salience score. Improv, when generating text, will use only text from the highest-scoring groups.

If the filter returns an Array, the first element is treated as the normal return value (Number or `null`); the second is treated as a new version of the group that was passed to it. This allows filters to modify groups as they pass through, allowing for fine handling of individual phrases or some other preprocessing step.

Inside a filter function body, `this` is bound to the generator object.

### Tags

While models and groups can have any properties you want and you can write custom filters that take them into account, Improv by default relies on a tagging system.

A tag is an array of strings (words) that is treated as a series of increasingly specific categories. Two tags that have the same first element (`a[0] === b[0]`) are considered a *matched pair*; all of the default filters look only at matched pairs when making decisions. That is, if a model and a group have no tags with identical first elements, they have no defined relationship to one another, and the salience score for that group will be 0 (the baseline score).

Matched pairs are compared side-by-side; if one of the tags has an element that is different from the element in the same position in its counterpart, they are *mismatched*. For instance, `['pet', 'dog', 'spaniel']` and `['pet', 'cat']` are mismatched.

If both halves of the matched pair are identical (all elements are the same), this is a *total match*. If all elements in one half of the pair match their counterparts, but the other half is longer, this is a *partial match*. For instance, `['pet', 'dog']` and `['pet', 'dog', 'spaniel']` are partially matched.

Note that order matters; `['pet', 'dog', 'spaniel']` and `['pet', 'spaniel']` are mismatched, not a partial match. `['pet', 'dog']`and `['dog', 'pet']` are not a matched pair at all.

### Included filters

Improv.filter contains *factories* that return functions; most of these can be customised. The ones that can't use the factory pattern for consistency's sake.

#### mismatchFilter ()

Returns null if the group and model have a mismatched tag pair, 0 otherwise. This filter is useful for completely removing inappropriate phrases from the pool.

#### partialBonus (bonus = 1, cumulative = false)

The `partialBonus` filter calculates salience score based on partial matches. If `cumulative` is false, it will return a score offset equal to `bonus`; if it is true, it will multiply that bonus by the number of partial matches. If there are no partial matches, it returns 0.

#### fullBonus (bonus = 1, cumulative = false)

Behaves identically to the `partialBonus` filter, but counts full matches instead.

#### dryness ()

Dry as in "don't repeat yourself". Dryness excludes any phrases that are found within the generator's history, making it so phrases are not repeated.

> Tip: You can compose generators with different rules together; the easiest way to do this is to pass generator `a` a model with a getter that returns the result of calling generator `b`. In ES6, you can also do a variety of Stupid Model Tricks using proxies.

#### unmentioned (bonus = 1)

Adds `bonus` to the salience score of any group tagged with a tag that hasn't been used yet. The main use of this is to produce text that has the appearance of generating a well-rounded description of something, trying to cover different aspects of the subject.

## Templating

All text Improv generates (from phrases in groups in snippets) is run through an extremely minimal templating engine. This engine recognises directives delimited by brackets (`[like so]`); directives are simply replaced in place by some other value. The templating engine recurs until it can't find directives in the text any more. Currently, brackets are the only supported delimiters, and they can't be escaped, but this should change eventually.

### Generator directives

Directives starting in `:` are passed back to the generator; this allows nesting snippets, like Tracery. For instance, the phrase `[:animal]` will resolve to the snippet named "animal" in the same generator's collection of snippets.

### Random number directives

Directives starting in `#` are replaced with a random number. `[#1-20]` will produce a random number between 1 and 20, inclusive. A hyphen is the delimiter between the two numbers.

### Plain directives

Directives that don't start with a special character are treated as properties of the model object to be retrieved. `[prop]` will look at the `prop` property of the model that was passed to `Improv#gen()`. This can be used to retrieve nested properties, eg `[nested.prop]`.

### Worked templating example

```js
const spec = {
  root: {
    groups: [
      {
        phrases: ['Hi, my name is [name], and I own [#1-20] [:pet]s.']
      }
    ]
  },
  pet: {
    groups: [
      {
        phrases: ['cat', 'dog', 'parakeet']
      }
    ]
  }
}

const greet = new Improv(spec);

// Should produce something like:
// "Hi, my name is Bob and I own 17 cats."
greet.gen(spec, { name: 'Bob' });
```

## Reincorporation

If you create a generator with `{ reincorporate: true }` in its options, that generator will update the model it's working with whenever it runs. What this means is that the tags associated with any phrase that it uses will be merged into the tags of the model.

For instance, suppose you are generating procedural descriptions of clothing; you could have phrases tagged as `['fabric', 'satin']` and so on. You don't have to specify a fabric tag beforehand; once the generator uses one, it will be incorporated to the model. Given the right use of filtering rules, this means Improv can be used to build free-form paragraphs of text that doesn't contradict itself; once it says the dress is satin, it will never use a phrase that says it's cotton.

## Caveats and Known Issues

Improv does absolutely no validation or security checking of anything, so for the love of God don't pass user-submitted data into it.

The API can and probably will change in the future as the library evolves.

## License

MIT © [Bruno Dias](http://segue.pw/)


[npm-image]: https://badge.fury.io/js/improv.svg
[npm-url]: https://npmjs.org/package/improv
[travis-image]: https://travis-ci.org/sequitur/improv.svg?branch=master
[travis-url]: https://travis-ci.org/sequitur/improv
[daviddm-image]: https://david-dm.org/sequitur/improv.svg?theme=shields.io
[daviddm-url]: https://david-dm.org/sequitur/improv
